{"Title":"Review: Science and Politics Collide in ‘The Death of Cancer’","Author":"ABIGAIL ZUGER, M.D","Time":"NOV. 30, 2015","Tag":"Cancer","Content":"The scene is a wild cocktail party in Washington at the tail end of the Kennedy administration. Our innocent young narrator, new to the rituals of power, watches in fascination as one of his superiors dances by with a half-undressed woman slung over a shoulder. By the end of the evening, he has helped hoist another of his bosses, dead drunk, out of a bathtub.\r\nAh, politics. As it happens, though, the inebriates in question are not politicians but doctors at the National Cancer Institute, and it is our callow observer, also a doctor, who soon grows preternaturally skilled at the politics of disease. Dr. Vincent T. DeVita Jr. soars through the ranks of the cancer institute to become its director, then departs for top-level positions at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Yale University.\r\nNow 80, a professor at Yale and one of the nation’s premier oncologists, Dr. DeVita has produced, with the help of his daughter, an utterly absorbing memoir, fierce and frank. Ears will burn, memories will doubtless differ on a few counts, and even his take on the particulars of cancer treatment may provoke debate. But the average reader will come away from the book with a superb basic education in all things oncological, from events on the cellular level to those in the rooms where research agendas are settled and checks are written.\r\nWe tend to forget how recently it was that cancer care was primitive. When Dr. DeVita arrived at the National Cancer Institute in 1963, the primary treatments were surgery and radiation, both deployed with a heavy hand. Those were the days of the radical mastectomy for breast cancer, and also the occasional “superradical mastectomy,” during which the surgeon actually dissected down into a woman’s chest cavity to ream out potential disease.\r\nChemotherapy was new, controversial and frightening. Doctors who used it were called “chemotherapists,” one step up from alchemists. The drugs were eerie: brightly colored and toxic. One was prone to spontaneous combustion, and a bottle of it actually exploded in the car trunk of one of Dr. DeVita’s colleagues.\r\nSmall wonder that these poisons were generally administered one by one in small doses, even though they didn’t work very well that way. But a cadre of visionaries (including the two party animals in charge of Dr. DeVita) were accumulating persuasive evidence that if the drugs were combined in high doses, they might be unimaginably effective.\r\nAt the beginning, Dr. DeVita writes, he “wasn’t sure if these scientists were maniacs or geniuses.” His supervisors were heckled at meetings and called “butchers” and worse, but he was quickly persuaded by their data.\r\nHe took on Hodgkin’s disease, a lymphoma that often affects teenagers and young adults and was then considered generally incurable. His team’s unique concoction of four powerful drugs directed at the tumor’s dividing cells changed that prognosis instantly: The disease became one of the few adult cancers that could actually be cured.\r\nBut the triumph of chemotherapy for Hodgkin’s and then for many other tumors opened an interlocking series of dilemmas. In the clinic and the hospital, the new protocols demanded that doctors muster the courage to make their patients very sick in order to make them well. But how sick was too sick? The risks and benefits of the powerful treatments now needed careful, deliberate assessment at every stage of the disease.\r\nSimilar questions dogged those who developed, evaluated and regulated the drugs. How poisonous could these agents safely be? How assiduously should desperate patients be saved by their government from pharmaceutical risk?\r\nDr. DeVita stands firmly among those affirming cancer patients’ right to aggressive treatment. One particular exchange summarizes his philosophy: “Do your patients speak to you after you do this to them?” one skeptic asked him early on. “The answer is yes,” he replied, “and for a lot longer.”\r\nThe regulatory caution of the Food and Drug Administration has been a thorn in his side for decades: “I’d like to be able to say that as cancer drugs have become increasingly more complex and sophisticated, the F.D.A. has as well. But it has not.” In fact, he writes, “the rate-limiting step in eradicating cancer today is not the science but the regulatory environment we work in.”\r\nHe offers story after compelling story of cancer patients living long and well thanks to hard-hitting, imaginatively designed chemotherapy, now augmented by the tools of modern immunology and molecular genetics. It is here that one suspects other observers might counter with descriptions of patients not nearly so well served by similarly aggressive treatment in less virtuoso hands.\r\nBut that is a small cavil to this compelling mélange of science, medicine and canny politicking — the launch of the “war on cancer” in 1971 infused enough government and private money into the field to raise many passionate and conflicting agendas, and Dr. DeVita was in the middle of them all.\r\nHe includes a brief, piercing personal footnote: In his official cancer institute photograph, taken outdoors, a 13th-floor window is visible in the background. That was his son Ted’s room.\r\nAs fate would have it, Ted developed at age 9 a disease called aplastic anemia that is essentially the opposite of cancer: His bone marrow failed completely. He lived for eight years in a sterile bubble in that room at the cancer institute and died there at 17, still awaiting the kind of miraculous treatment his father could dispense so forcefully for others."}
{"Title":"Living With Cancer: Shedding Tears","Author":"Susan Gubar","Time":"December 23, 2015 11:27 am","Tag":"Cancer","Content":"At times, I was so encased in the stoicism needed to endure cancer treatments that I could not feel much of anything unless someone else felt sorry for me.\r\nSeveral years ago, debilitating infections threatened my life. Depleted by chemotherapy and a series of drains inserted into my body by interventional radiologists, I could barely creep from the hospital parking garage to post-surgical appointments. During the ordeal, I managed to put one foot in front of the other, but only by shutting down my emotions.\r\nOn one trip, when it turned out I had to be hospitalized, a nurse practitioner patted my arm. “You’ve really been through it,” she said. Summoned by her words of commiseration, tears coursed down my cheeks. Curiously, they were a relief. I needed her sympathy to experience my own sadness.\r\nThe oddity of my emotional dependency reminds me of the ending of a novella I have often taught: Tolstoy’s “The Death of Ivan Ilych.” After Ivan finally stops denying a mortal illness, he becomes so absorbed by his physical degeneration and pain that he feels encased inside a black bag.\r\nWhen his son arrives at his deathbed and begins to cry, Ivan falls through the bottom of the black sack, catching “sight of the light.” A compassionate witness — another suffering his suffering — delivers Ivan from confinement. The dying man perceives the anguish of his survivor and this interpersonal witnessing — the son grieving for his father, the father for his son — ruptures pain’s carapace.\r\nPain threatened to engulf Christina Middlebrook during a harrowing bone marrow transplant that she recounts in her memoir, “Seeing the Crab.” Unable to swallow and vomiting blood, she could not think, remember, watch a video or do anything except hope for an empathetic companion to perceive her suffering.\r\nIf such a person was absent, Ms. Middlebrook tried to disentangle her psyche from her body; somehow, she had to split herself off from the physical wreckage. Doused in doses of chemicals, platelets, diuretics, anti-nausea and sleeping and pain medications, she found herself “called back” from vacuity only by a caring spectator.\r\nWithout those periodic witnesses “who knew who I was,” she explains, “I could not know myself.”\r\nWhen I was completely incapacitated, my most precious moments with my daughters and stepdaughters involved their sitting nearby, sometimes in silence, on one occasion reading aloud a children’s book, on another singing a song I used to sing to them.\r\nWhat of the parents who sing those special songs to babies and toddlers undergoing cancer treatments? These surely must be the most heroic caregivers: residing in hospital rooms, endlessly dispensing medicine, coping with nasogastric tubes and catheters and sleep deprivation while attempting to give their offspring a sense of a normal life and, at the same time, lamenting the afflictions of children too young to express their own lamentations.\r\nThese days I know I am better off because when my husband is asleep, I can pop in a CD of Beethoven’s “Cavatina,” reread your comments on my essays and start bawling all on my own. Blowing my nose, I think that I cannot possibly deserve such thoughtful readers.\r\nAlthough cancer patients are repeatedly enjoined to gird their loins and fight the disease or to invest in the powers of now or in positive thinking, many realize that welling up can be cathartic. Quite a few cancer memoirists describe staging a pity party: a private event at which they listen to the music or look at the pictures or read the poems that will lead them to cry over their losses. Such scenarios should not be dismissed as excuses for self-indulgence; sometimes we need to serve as our own sympathetic companions.\r\nWeeping over cancer can provide an intermission from fighting it or, for that matter, raging at or fearing the disease. Call it wallowing, but I find myself tapping into sadness periodically, as if a deep reservoir of sorrow lies just below the seemingly calm surface of my existence.\r\nThis gulf of grief has everything to do with what my friend Andrew H. Miller calls the “unled lives” or “the counter-factual histories” that disease generates. Cancer makes me ask: How would my life have evolved if I hadn’t gotten the disease? Worse, it makes me worry: Why didn’t I or my doctor detect it earlier and wouldn’t I be better off if we had? And shouldn’t I have taken the advice of my gynecologist 20 years ago about having a hysterectomy?\r\nThe haunting person I might have become — the life I might have led — breeds regret until I wipe my eyes, turn off the record player and remind myself that I easily could have died several years ago during all those infections. Then, in this holiday season, I think of Scrooge visiting his own grave.\r\nWhile I enjoy sobbing through multiple adaptations of The Christmas Carol after Hanukkah this year, I will be blessing those who have saved me and many other patients from devolving into automata: all those compassionate witnesses, near and far, known and unknown, each and every one of you."}
{"Title":"How to Halve the Death Rate From Colon Cancer","Author":"DENISE GRADY","Time":"MAY 1, 2007","Tag":"Cancer","Content":"EVEN though screening tests can prevent colorectal cancer or find it early enough to cure, the disease is still the second-leading cause of cancer death in the United States, with nearly 165,000 new cases and more than 52,000 deaths expected this year.\r\nRates of colorectal cancer have been declining in recent years, by about 2 percent annually, thanks mostly to increased screening. Yet fewer than half the people who should be screened bother to do so. If they did, the death rate could probably be halved, cancer experts say.\r\nThe reason this cancer is so easily prevented or cured is that most of the time it begins as a polyp in the lining of the intestine, progressing slowly and possibly turning malignant. Tests that examine the colon can find polyps, and doctors can snip them out before they become cancers. Or the tests can reveal early tumors that can also be removed.\r\nBut tests for colorectal cancer are not popular. Most adults should start being screened at age 50 (sooner for people at high risk because of family history, certain bowel disorders or gene mutations), but many put it off. Some are squeamish about the tests, which require patients to collect stool samples or have an instrument inserted into the rectum.\r\nScreening advocates point out that the unpleasantness is a small price to pay to avoid a painful and deadly disease, and most people who have had the tests say they are no big deal. The worst part of a colonoscopy, many people find, is not the test itself, which is usually done under sedation, but the “prep,” which requires a day at home to take supercharged laxatives to empty the intestines.\r\n“Data tells us this is a problem of people not feeling a strong impetus to be screened from their primary care physician,” said Dr. Robert Smith, the director of screening for the American Cancer Society. “Doctors think patients won’t want to do it, so they don’t bring it up. And they may be ambivalent about which test to endorse. Some patients get a referral, leave the office and the process of scheduling is so esoteric it just doesn’t happen. Everybody’s intending to do the right thing, but it doesn’t get around to taking place.”\r\nFor people with an average risk of developing colorectal cancer, the American Cancer Society recommends that screening start at 50, with one of five tests:\r\nAn annual fecal occult blood test, or a new version called a fecal immunochemical test, to look for blood in the stool.\r\nEvery five years, flexible sigmoidoscopy, in which a scope examines the lower part of the colon.\r\nAn annual stool test with sigmoidoscopy every five years.\r\nA test involving a barium enema and X-rays every five years.\r\nEvery 10 years, colonoscopy, in which a scope is inserted into the rectum to examine the entire large intestine.\r\nIf one of the first four tests finds anything abnormal, colonoscopy is needed to check further.\r\nThe first test developed for blood in the stool required that patients avoid eating red meat or raw vegetables for several days beforehand, to avoid false positives, but that is not required for the newer immunochemical test. This test is also easier to perform and may replace the old one, but it costs more and not all insurers cover it yet, Dr. Smith said.\r\nPatients must do the stool tests themselves at home on several samples, the cancer society emphasizes.\r\nPolyps are less likely to bleed than actual cancers, so the tests for blood are more likely to find cancers than they are to detect polyps.\r\nThe drawback of sigmoidoscopy is that it examines only the lower part of the colon, so it misses polyps or cancers higher up.\r\nBarium-enema tests do not find as many small polyps as colonoscopy does, Dr. Smith said.\r\nBut colonoscopy can also miss polyps, especially if doctors rush it, studies have found. Yet it is still the best test, Dr. Smith said, because when done carefully it finds small polyps, which can be removed right then. For most people, the test does not have to be done more than once every 10 years.\r\n“But is it available or can you pay?” Dr. Smith said. “Can you get the examination in a timely fashion? You may have an eight- or nine-month wait to get one.”\r\nSome doctors do tests for blood in the stool when patients are in the 10-year interval between colonoscopies, but Dr. Smith said that is “excessive and not justified.”\r\n“Virtual colonoscopy” sounds less onerous to some people. It involves using a CT scan instead of a scope, and doesn’t require sedation. It does require the same prep as colonoscopy, with a tube inserted into the rectum to inflate the colon with gas to create clearer images.\r\nPolyps cannot be removed during this procedure, so if any show up, the patient has to go back for a colonoscopy.\r\nThe virtual test is being heavily marketed by some clinics, but the American Cancer Society and other groups are not recommending it yet, saying it needs more study.\r\nBut Dr. Smith said, “I think the data from expert centers is really quite promising.”"}
{"Title":"If Cancer Becomes Biden’s Cause, a Bold but Polarizing Doctor Is On Call","Author":"PETER BKER","Time":"NOV.1, 2015","Tag":"Cancer","Content":"One day last winter, desperate as his son fought for his life against a killer brain cancer, Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. and his family reached out to one of America’s most famous, and controversial, doctors for help.\r\nThe doctor, Patrick Soon-Shiong, a billionaire medical entrepreneur and investor who made a fortune developing an important cancer drug and now has broader ambitions for fighting cancer, flew to Washington from California to meet with the vice president’s family. That would open a series of meetings over time with the vice president as well as with Beau Biden, the ailing son.\r\nIn the end, Beau Biden died of his cancer in May. But the vice president and the cancer doctor have developed a relationship that is powering the next stage of Mr. Biden’s public life. Having concluded that he did not have enough time to defeat Hillary Rodham Clinton for the Democratic presidential nomination, Mr. Biden is instead embarking on a campaign perhaps more daunting: finally defeating cancer.\r\n“I believe that we need a moonshot in this country to cure cancer,” Mr. Biden said in his speech in the White House Rose Garden last month announcing that he would not run for president. “It’s personal. But I know we can do this.”\r\nIn describing this “moonshot,” Mr. Biden was adopting language used by Dr. Soon-Shiong to describe his aspiration for cancer research. The two met for an hour in the White House just a few weeks ago, and Dr. Soon-Shiong gave the vice president a two-page outline of what he had in mind.\r\n“We need to find a completely different way to change cancer care in this country,” Dr. Soon-Shiong said in an interview. “Vice President Biden could play an amazing role in making this happen.”\r\nHis stature and personal experience give Mr. Biden a unique opportunity to bring together Republicans and Democrats, the doctor added. “He’s very passionate about it.”\r\nFor a politician whose career has been built on passion, this is when Mr. Biden is figuring out what comes next. He turns 73 this month and faces involuntary retirement in January 2017 after 44 years as a senator and vice president. After focusing on trying to save Beau and then on whether to run for president, Mr. Biden is only now beginning to concentrate on his remaining 15 months in office and beyond.\r\nFriends hardly expect him to while away days in retirement. “One thing you can say about Joe Biden is he won’t go quietly into the night,” said former Senator Ted Kaufman, a Democrat from Delaware and longtime aide who remains one of his closest advisers.\r\nWhile friends ruled out another elective office or post like secretary of state, they said Mr. Biden could serve as a university president or special envoy for specific international missions. The family has established the Beau Biden Foundation for the Protection of Children, and the vice president attended its first charity golf tournament in Wilmington, Del., last week.\r\nThe transition could be hard for a man accustomed to the action.\r\n“He’s had this incredible life at the very center of the great issues surrounding our nation and its future — war and peace, you name it, he’s been at the center of that stuff,” former Vice President Walter F. Mondale said. “When he walks out of that office at the end of their term, he’s going to wonder what in the hell is he going to do.”\r\nMr. Mondale, who spent time with Mr. Biden in Washington last month, said there was life after the vice presidency. “He’s still got a lot of zip in him,” he said. “He’s healthy, and he’s got a huge name around the world.”\r\nFor now, the cancer idea has absorbed Mr. Biden, but he is only starting to sort through how to approach it.\r\n“It really captures so many of the policies and ideals that make the vice president special,” said Robert Hoopes, a former aide to Mr. Biden. “It’s personal. He brings an intensity to it that really resonates with people. He knows how to get stuff done.”\r\nFederal cancer funding has been relatively flat for more than a decade except for a onetime $1.3 billion burst from President Obama’s stimulus program early in his administration. For the 2016 fiscal year, the National Cancer Institute asked for $5.8 billion, and Mr. Obama pared that to $5.1 billion in his proposed budget, roughly the same as in 2010.\r\nThe two-page paper Dr. Soon-Shiong gave Mr. Biden, titled in part “The Moonshot Program to Develop a Cancer Vaccine,” advocates an expanded use of genome sequencing to understand individual cancers better and tailor treatments depending on their genetic characteristics. It forecasts the creation of patient-specific cancer vaccines that harness a person’s own “natural killer cells” to treat and prevent the recurrence of cancer.\r\nThe paper, obtained from an associate of Mr. Biden’s, proposes performing full genomic sequencing of 100,000 cancer patients in the next 400 days to create a vast database for supercomputer analysis, although no price tag is mentioned. “With 16 months to go, it is a perfect moment for the administration to deliver on this last mile, cementing this health care transformation into the fabric of health care,” it says.\r\nDr. Soon-Shiong, 63, the son of Chinese immigrants growing up in apartheid-era South Africa, studied medicine and eventually moved to the United States, where he worked as a surgeon. He invented the cancer drug Abraxane in the early 1990s and has become a major investor in medical businesses, philanthropist and part-owner of the Los Angeles Lakers. With his NantWorks health empire, he has accumulated a fortune estimated by Forbes at $12.5 billion, and he was featured last year on “60 Minutes” as the man trying to disrupt cancer.\r\nBut he has been in the middle of conflicts. A dispute with his own brother resulted in a lawsuit. A New York Times investigation in 2002 questioned the financial relationship between a drug company he headed and a hospital drug purchaser. Some cancer researchers view him as a “blowhard” with a “deep streak of P. T. Barnum showmanship,” as Forbes put it. His companies are for profit, and researchers say he sometimes oversells his ideas.\r\n“I’ve heard him make claims that are clearly wild exaggerations,” said Steven Salzberg, a professor of biomedical engineering at Johns Hopkins University.\r\nMr. Biden should seek multiple voices, the professor added. “I would urge him to be careful about putting all his eggs in one basket,” he said. “If he says Patrick Soon-Shiong is it, then of course I’d be cautious about that.”\r\nMr. Biden’s aides emphasized that he is reaching out to an array of experts. Among them is Dr. Wai-Kwan Alfred Yung, a co-director of the brain tumor center at University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, who treated Beau Biden and has remained in close touch, exchanging emails with the vice president after his announcement last month.\r\nDr. Yung said in an interview that Mr. Biden should not rely exclusively on Dr. Soon-Shiong. “He certainly has a controversial name and is polarizing,” he said. “I think he was consulted during Beau’s illness, and he was pushing the vice president pretty hard to sell his program.” But Dr. Yung said Mr. Biden “has to be careful” to be inclusive and not look as if “you’ve already been sold by one or two parties.”\r\nStill, it is easy to see why Dr. Soon-Shiong may appeal to Mr. Biden. If both may employ hyperbole at times, Dr. Soon-Shiong’s expansive talk about revolutionary change can be infectious. He is no incrementalist, and for a politician in the final stage of elective life, there is no time like the present to make a mark.\r\n“I’ve never been more hopeful in my life about our chance of changing the course of this disease,” Dr. Soon-Shiong said. And Mr. Biden can make that happen. “Here’s a man who enveloped himself during his son’s illness and got to understand the fine intricacies of this disease and is a person who could cross the aisle and work with Republicans and Democrats.”\r\nIf it works, he said, “this whole world could change.”"}
{"Title":"Seeking a Cancer-Free World","Author":"EMMA PIERSON","Time":"NOV. 30, 2015","Tag":"Cancer","Content":"My grandfather received a diagnosis of brain cancer a week before I had to hand in my master’s thesis. The very first chapter discussed a scientific paper about his type of brain tumor. I found comfort in losing myself in the work: I sat by his hospital bed as he slept, and analyzed cancer data, typing out equations filled with Greek symbols that he had joked were some kind of sorcery.\r\nWhen he woke, I presented him with a copy of the thesis; the dedication began, “To my grandfather, who says the math in this thesis is black magic.” My grandmother, a former scientific editor, alternated between feeding my grandfather matzo ball soup and critiquing the language in the thesis; “data,” she said, should be plural.\r\n“I agree with your grandmother,” my grandfather said from his bed.\r\n“Plural sounds pretentious,” I told them.\r\nAt least, I thought, I was working on something that would help him. But the night after I visited him in the hospital, I reread the brain cancer paper referred to in my thesis and felt despair. It was far more impressive than my thesis — the sort of work I hoped one day to produce, published in a top-tier journal by more than a dozen scientists. But it offered nothing that could help treat my grandfather; rather, it pointed out how far from understanding brain cancer we are. Brain cancers classified as a single subtype, in fact, contain cells from multiple subtypes of cancer, and this heterogeneity means that treatments are more likely to fail.\r\nI started studying cancer because I had hoped to help myself and those I loved. I learned at 20 that I had inherited the BRCA1 mutation from my mother, who had gotten it from my grandfather. A study in the journal Science found that carriers like me, from families with a history of breast cancer, have an 81 percent lifetime risk of breast cancer and a 54 percent lifetime risk of ovarian cancer.\r\n“Like the protagonist in ‘Flowers for Algernon,’ I will be both scientist and patient,” I wrote, conveniently forgetting that the protagonist was fictional.\r\nWe love it when scientists study themselves. We idolize (justly) the researchers who lost their lives during the Ebola outbreak even as they worked to sequence the virusthat was killing them.\r\nBut in the four years since I learned I carried a BRCA mutation, I have watched my attempts to do something about it repeatedly miss the mark. I joined a laboratory to do cancer research, but the paper we wrote had little to do with cancer; I joined a company that offered the cheapest BRCA tests on the market, and its service was shut down a month after I arrived. I am 24 years old; at 25, I will have to choose between aggressive screening and prophylactic mastectomy. I had hoped to use my brain to protect my body, but I am running out of time.\r\nIf life’s complexities confound a 20-year-old’s desperate idealism, cancer’s do as well. The more I learn, the more I worry that we may never find a singular cure for cancer: that each cancer’s unique biological filigree necessitates a brutal and byzantine combination of treatments.\r\nI also worry that the end goal is so far away that we sometimes lose sight of its importance, and view biological research as a competitive game rather than a means of saving lives. I feared being the worst student in my first cancer class, even though a roomful of researchers better than I am is exactly what I should want. Since then, I’ve seen many indications of the competitiveness in cancer research — a teacher who made us promise not to steal other students’ final projects, scientists who snipe at one another or falsify work — that make me think I am not the only one who sometimes forgets what is at stake.\r\nIt is easy to stagger back from the vastness of the problem. “We don’t even understand the rules of the game,” a scientist at the Broad Institute told me. “We are playing checkers, and cancer is playing chess.”\r\nBut here at last is a metaphor that gives me hope — because, as it happens, my grandfather taught me to love chess. From the time I was 7, we played every Sunday at a local French cafe, battling for hours over crepes with strawberries and whipped cream. My grandfather was not a scientist, but he loved chess because he had a scientist’s love of a problem complex beyond comprehension. (We also spent a lot of time trying to prove Goldbach’s Conjecture, a statement about prime numbers that has stood for 250 years.) To cancer’s complexities, I think my grandfather would say, as I do, “Bring ’em on.”\r\nWhich is not to say this problem will be solved in my lifetime. But this is perhaps the most important lesson I learned from my grandfather: the value of fighting for a future you will never see. Raised by a single mother at the height of the Great Depression, he became a lawyer who devoted much of his earnings to ensuring that all eight of his grandchildren could go to college, even though he knew he would never see us all graduate. As he lay in the hospital, he kept asking how many graduate degrees I would earn.\r\nI am not going to cure cancer, not even the BRCA cancers. And I am going to watch the people I love die from diseases I cannot understand or prevent. I would be lying if I told you I have made my peace with that. It gives me hope only to fight, as my grandfather did, for futures unseen: to strive, to seek, to find and not to yield."}
{"Title":"Finding Whether Diabetes Lurks","Author":"DENISE GRADY","Time":"MAY 1, 2007","Tag":"Diabetes","Content":"MORE than six million Americans are walking around with no idea that they have an insidious disease with the potential to wreak havoc throughout the body.\r\nThe disease is diabetes, and it causes high blood sugar levels that can damage arteries and lead to heart disease, strokes, kidney failure, amputations and blindness. It is the sixth-leading cause of death in the United States.\r\nThe idea of so many people — roughly 30 percent of the 21 million Americans who have the disease — going without treatment is disturbing because diabetes can do so much damage. But in its early stages, people often do not realize they are ill, because the symptoms — if there are any — may creep up gradually or be attributed to overwork or aging.\r\n“Certain signs are important,” said Dr. F. Xavier Pi-Sunyer, chief of endocrinology, diabetes and nutrition at St. Luke’s-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan. “If you have to get up a couple of times to urinate at night, and you didn’t before, that’s a suggestive sign. Also, vision blurring of any kind, suddenly beginning to lose a significant amount of weight without trying, frequent skin infections or vaginal infections. And this is nonspecific, but if you’re getting headaches and feeling kind of fatigued.”\r\nAny of those symptoms should prompt testing for diabetes, Dr. Pi-Sunyer said. So should certain risk factors, especially if there are more than one. Aging and obesity increase the odds that a person will develop Type 2, or adult-onset diabetes, the most common form. Weight is a particular risk factor, especially if it is mostly in the belly — a waist over 40 inches in men or 35 inches in women. Blacks, Native Americans and Hispanics have a higher-than-average risk, as do people with a family history of the disease. Being sedentary may also increase the risk, though not all researchers agree about that.\r\nPeople who appear healthy but have risk factors should be tested for diabetes every three years, Dr. Pi-Sunyer said.\r\nThe simplest means for earlier detection is a blood sugar test, measured after a person has fasted for at least eight hours. Readings above 126 milligrams of glucose per tenth of a liter of blood indicate diabetes; anything below 100 is considered normal. Intermediate levels reflect impaired glucose metabolism or “pre-diabetes.” People in this category need yearly testing, because up to 8 percent of them will become diabetic each year. About 54 million Americans are pre-diabetic.\r\nThough many doctors in the United States like the fasting blood sugar test because it is quick and easy, some use another test, one that may pick up diabetes at an even earlier stage. This is a glucose tolerance test, in which the patient is given a fasting blood sugar test, drinks a glucose solution and then has another blood sugar test two hours later. People who test positive for Type 2 diabetes are generally advised to lose weight and exercise more, and some may also need drugs to help lower blood sugar. They will also usually be tested for conditions that often go along with Type 2 diabetes, like high blood pressure and high cholesterol and triglyceride levels.\r\nA major study of people with impaired glucose metabolism found that among those who did moderate exercise, like walking for just 30 minutes a day, and who lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight, there were 58 percent fewer new cases of diabetes than in a similar group of people who did not exercise or lose weight.\r\nThe study also found that a commonly used diabetes drug, metformin, could help lower the risk of the disease in pre-diabetics. But the drug did not work as well as weight loss and exercise, and it is approved only for diabetes, not for pre-diabetes.\r\nIn April a genetic test was introduced that can also identify people with an increased risk of developing Type 2 diabetes. The $500 test by DeCode Genetics cannot predict diabetes definitively, but it might motivate people with a high risk to exercise and lose weight. It can be ordered by doctors or from a company called DNA Direct."}
{"Title":"Many Schools Failing on Type 1 Diabetes Care","Author":"CATHERINE SAINT LOUIS","Time":"OCT. 26, 2015","Tag":"Diabetes","Content":"With twin boys ready for school, Jason and Jessica Pollard braced for paperwork, parent-teacher meetings and shopping trips for supplies. But they were not prepared for the reception their son, Owen, then 5, received from school administrators.\r\nOfficials at their neighborhood kindergarten and a nearby private academy said he would not be allowed to attend because he has Type 1 diabetes. The Pollards, doctors in Seattle, were flabbergasted.\r\nOne headmaster said that Owen would never be accepted because of his disability. “It took everything in me not give him the middle finger,” said Dr. Jessica Pollard, a pediatric oncologist.\r\nThe Pollards are hardly the first family to face this kind of discrimination. Too many schools are failing to provide the growing number of students who have Type 1 diabetes with the routine care they need, such as insulin shots or blood sugar monitoring, federal regulators and diabetes experts say. And often, parents do not know they have the legal right to insist on it.\r\nThe incidence of Type 1 diabetes among children has increased by 21 percent in recent years. In 2009, an estimated 167,000 children had the disease, according to the latest figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In nearly 400 cases since 2011, parents have brought complaints to federal authorities about schools that decline to care for these students.\r\nExperts say the number vastly understates the problem in public and private education.\r\nMany children have been barred from attending their zoned schools or abruptly transferred after diagnosis to schools with nurses, even when their doctors say nursing care is not warranted. Others are not allowed to participate in sports or extracurricular activities.\r\nParents have been told no school employee is willing to inject lifesaving glucagon even if their child falls unconscious.\r\nThe burden for care often falls to the students’ parents. Some jeopardize their jobs with daily trips to schools; some end up pulling their children from school altogether.\r\n“We have principals who tell mothers, ‘Sorry, but you’ll have to home-school your kid,’ ” said Crystal C. Jackson, the director of the American Diabetes Association’s Safe at School program, which educates parents about students’ rights and provides legal aid. “It’s outrageous.”\r\nThese practices may be ingrained, but they are also largely illegal. In 2013, the federal Department of Justice found that the State of Alabama systematically discriminated against diabetic schoolchildren for years; students with Type 1 diabetes were not allowed to join field trips and sports practices, or to attend the same schools as their siblings.\r\n“Without question, we do continue to see discrimination against students with Type 1 diabetes in schools in ways I find distressing,” said Catherine E. Lhamon, the assistant secretary in the federal Education Department’s civil rights office. “We see schools that say, ‘We can’t serve you because you have a disability.’\r\n“What an ugly message to send to a family.”\r\nUnlike Type 2 diabetes, which is linked to obesity and inactivity, Type 1 is an autoimmune condition that leads to destruction of cells in the pancreas, which normally produce the insulin needed to regulate blood sugar.\r\nBlood sugar levels must be monitored in these students, and insulin administered via injections or a pump before meals. Failure to do so can result in serious complications over time, including blindness, kidney damage or amputations. When blood sugar levels go very low, children with Type 1 diabetes may have seizures or die.\r\nIn the past, school nurses assisted diabetic pupils, but their ranks have dwindled with budget cuts. Now, in 29 states and the District of Columbia, trained teachers, administrators or coaches are permitted to give routine insulin and emergency glucagon, according to the American Diabetes Association. School employees follow individual plans written by a doctor or a nurse.\r\nPublic and private schools are required by federal law to accommodate students with disabilities, including diabetes. Only those run by religious institutions without federal funding are exempt. But though some state laws expressly permit trained non-nurses to help children with Type 1 diabetes, not every administration is willing to allow staff to do so.\r\nIn 2011, after Kristin Hayles’s daughter, Brynn, then 5, developed Type 1 diabetes, officials at her private school, the Post Oak School, said no one would help test the girl’s blood sugar or administer glucagon, even if her blood sugar were dangerously low. “My understanding was they don’t have to do anything for her,” said Mrs. Hayles, a geophysicist in Houston.\r\nMrs. Hayles left her office to inject Brynn’s insulin before lunch at school and taught her to test her own blood sugar. Concerned that the setup was unworkable and that Brynn might suffer harm, Mrs. Hayles eventually pulled her daughter out of class.\r\n“They were totally ignorant of the disease,” Mrs. Hayles said. “It was just a unsafe situation.” Brynn, 9, is now home-schooled.\r\nThe Post Oak School did not respond to several requests for comment.\r\nMany school officials do not realize that they are obligated to care for children with Type 1 diabetes. But federal protections, like Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act and the Americans With Disabilities Act, largely grant children equal access to education and to extracurricular activities.\r\nThe Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights enforces so-called 504 plans, which detail the accommodations a student with a disability requires. Since 2011, the office has handled 60 to 100 complaints annually related to diabetes.\r\nThose cases probably understate the problem: The Justice Department said it mostly depends on parents to report suspected discrimination by schools, but parents often do not know that the enforcement mechanism exists. For her part, Ms. Lhamon of the Education Department said, “The families who don’t know they can come to us to safeguard their rights keep me up at night.”\r\nIn the last five years, the Justice Department has pursued a handful of cases of discrimination against diabetic children, most notably in Alabama.\r\nIn 2010, school officials in Birmingham, Ala., told LaTonya Monroe-Terry that her son Quintarius, then 12, could no longer attend his local school because he depended on insulin injections. Instead, he was forced to go to a nurse-staffed school further away, leaving behind teachers and friends in the middle of sixth grade.\r\nNo bus would shuttle him. So, Mrs. Monroe-Terry put her job at a finance company in jeopardy, picking up Quintarius at 2:30 p.m. then hurrying back to her desk. “I didn’t know that wasn’t right,” she said.\r\nIn 2012, officials forbade Quintarius from attending his local high school and said a transfer to a school with a nurse was mandatory. The family refused. After school officials threatened Mrs. Monroe-Terry with criminal charges, she complained to the Justice Department.\r\n\r\nTheir case became part of a far-reaching investigation into three school districts and Alabama’s education department. The Justice Department found that forced transfers happened routinely.\r\n“This is a matter of straightforward, impermissible differential treatment,” a department report concluded, citing three other students with Type 1 diabetes who, like Quintarius, were unnecessarily transferred. The investigation also found that some parents had given up jobs to provide at-school care a few times a day.\r\nIn 2014, a new state law prohibited the transfers of diabetic children and authorized trained school personnel to administer insulin and glucagon to diabetic students, including those like Quintarius who play football for the school. But officials at the D.O.J. suspect the rights of diabetic pupils are regularly disregarded in other states, as well.\r\n“There could be other Alabamas we don’t know about,” said Eve Hill, a deputy assistant attorney general for civil rights at the Justice Department.\r\n“There are so many examples of situations you’d think school districts would know better, and they don’t,” said Alan L. Yatvin, a civil rights lawyer in Philadelphia who is a former chair of legal advocacy for the American Diabetes Association.\r\nLast year, Mr. Yatvin filed suit on behalf of a 4-year-old forced out of a Head Start program in Philadelphia after a Type 1 diabetes diagnosis, and intervened in another instance in which a high-school athlete with Type 1 diabetes was barred from sports unless one of his parents was present.\r\nIn both cases, schools were required to hire nurses to tend to the pupils. “You can’t require parents to do what a school is supposed to do under the law,” Mr. Yatvin said, adding that the 4-year-old missed nearly five months of education because of her exclusion.\r\nOutside hospitals, most diabetes care is handled by laypeople like parents. Nonetheless, critics say overworked school employees are ill-equipped to assist diabetic students. In 2013, before the California Supreme Court, the American Nurses Association argued that allowing unlicensed nonnurses to give insulin would put children at risk. (The court ruled otherwise, and the state now permits trained school employees to assist diabetic students.)\r\nSome administrators fear that providing care with staff volunteers may expose them to legal trouble if something goes wrong. In fact, schools and their employees in many states are shielded from liability.\r\n“As long as they are acting in good faith, they can’t be sued,” said Laura Keller, the director of state government relations for the Northwest region for the American Diabetes Association.\r\nSchool officials may be obligated to provide routine care to these students, but relying on staff volunteers does not always work.\r\nThe Pollards were thrilled when University Child Development School, a private school, accepted him and his twin, Miles. U.C.D.S. did not have a nurse on staff, but Dr. Craig Taplin, an endocrinologist at Seattle Children’s Hospital, was confident that a school employee could be trained to help Owen.\r\nJust days before the beginning of school, however, U.C.D.S. told the Pollards that no staff member would help Owen. “It was a community of well-educated, knowledgeable people saying, ‘You’re not welcome,’ ” Dr. Jessica Pollard said.\r\nFor a month, the Pollards took turns spending entire days at Owen’s school. On one occasion, Dr. Jason Pollard, an anesthesiologist, went to get a haircut only to receive a phone call from a school official demanding he immediately return. “It became a requirement that we had to stay,” he said. Eventually they paid their nanny to tend to Owen at school.\r\nOutraged, the Pollards filed a complaint with the Department of Justice and Washington’s Department of Early Learning.\r\nIn a statement to The New York Times, Paula Smith, the head of U.C.D.S., denied that school had discriminated against Owen, calling the safety of students the school’s “first priority.”\r\nAt the beginning of the school year, she said, administrators sought staff volunteers to help with Owen’s care. None stepped forward, and “the school did not require any employee to serve as a volunteer.”\r\nIn other instances where no volunteer wanted to help, schools have hired nurses, said Kayla C. Stahman, an assistant United States attorney who investigated the Pollards complaint.\r\nAfter extensive negotiations, the school repaid the Pollards more than $20,000 for Owen’s care. Exasperated, the couple uprooted to Falmouth, Me. Their move ended the investigation.\r\nA nurse now monitors Owen at a public school, and thus far, there have been no administrative hiccups. “It’s awesome,” Dr. Jason Pollard said. “It’s 180 degrees the opposite of what we had in Seattle.”"}
{"Title":"New Diabetes Cases, at Long Last, Begin to Fall in the United States","Author":"SABRINA TAVERNISE","Time":"DEC. 1, 2015","Tag":"Diabetes","Content":"After decades of relentless rise, the number of new cases of diabetes in the United States has finally started to decline.\r\nThe rate of new cases fell by about a fifth from 2008 to 2014, according to researchers at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the first sustained decline since the disease started to explode in this country about 25 years ago.\r\nThe drop has been gradual and for a number of years was not big enough to be statistically meaningful. But new data for 2014 released on Tuesday serves as a robust confirmation that the decline is real, officials said. There were 1.4 million new cases of diabetes in 2014, down from 1.7 million in 2008.\r\n“It seems pretty clear that incidence rates have now actually started to drop,” said Edward Gregg, one of the C.D.C.’s top diabetes researchers. “Initially it was a little surprising because I had become so used to seeing increases everywhere we looked.”\r\nExperts say they do not know whether efforts to prevent diabetes have finally started to work, or if the disease has simply peaked in the population. But they say the shift tracks with the nascent progress that has been reported recently in the health of Americans.\r\nThere is growing evidence that eating habits, after decades of deterioration, have finally begun to improve. The amount of soda Americans drink has declined by about a quarter since the late 1990s, and the average number of daily calories children and adults consume also has fallen. Physical activity has started to rise, and once-surging rates of obesity, a major driver of Type 2 diabetes, the most common form of the disease, have flattened. Type 1 diabetes, often diagnosed in childhood and adolescence and not usually associated with excess body weight, was also included in the data.\r\nExperts cautioned that the portion of Americans with diabetes was still more than double what it was in the early 1990s. They said progress had been uneven. Educated Americans have seen improvements, for example, while the rates for the less educated have flattened but not declined. The number of new cases is dropping for whites, the 2014 data show, but the change has not been statistically significant for blacks or Hispanics, though both show a downward trend.\r\nStill, the shift represents a profound change in one of the most vexing health problems in the United States. Diabetes afflicts one in every 10 American adults and is the country’s leading cause of blindness, limb amputations and kidney dialysis.\r\n“It’s not yet time to have a parade,” said Dr. David M. Nathan, the director of the Diabetes Center and Clinical Research Center at Massachusetts General Hospital. But he noted, “It has finally entered into the consciousness of our population that the sedentary lifestyle is a real problem, that increased body weight is a real problem.”\r\nEven here in Alabama, which has the highest prevalence of diabetes in the country, the rate of new cases has begun to taper. According to figures for 2013, the most recent available by state, 12.7 percent of Alabama’s residents had the disease.\r\nIn the tiny town of Eutaw, Lynette Carpenter got serious about staving off diabetes around the time her cousin’s leg was amputated because of the disease. She started to make a dish she called Sexy Pork Chops, involving a bell pepper, an onion and the oven. She weaned herself off Coca-Cola, going from about 50 cans a week to fewer than seven. And she started walking, leaving rubber bands in her mailbox to pull onto her arm — one for each mile walked — to remind her how many miles she had gone. The result made her doctor proud: She lost 42 pounds, and two years later has still not developed full-blown diabetes.\r\nDiabetes “has got my respect and attention,” she said. “I take it real serious.”\r\nRobin Williams, a music teacher in Birmingham, lost 33 pounds by cutting out candy, packing her lunch and not buying fast food during long bus trips to band practice, habits she learned in a Y.M.C.A. program on diabetes prevention. She started watching “My 600-lb Life,” a television show about people losing weight, with her teenage daughter. The show frightened her, as did her father’s leg amputations two years ago. She is down to 222 pounds, and is determined to keep going.\r\n“I want to see my child grow up,” Ms. Williams said. She uses an app on her phone to track her calories. “It made me much more conscious of what I was putting in my mouth.”\r\nDiabetes has been particularly devastating here in what is known as the Black Belt, a strip of counties that originally got its name for its fertile soil. Its majority black populations were once slaves, and later, after the Civil War, they were sharecroppers. The area had some of the worst racial violence of the Jim Crow era, said Hasan Kwame Jeffries, an associate professor of history at Ohio State University, and today is among the poorest in the country.\r\n“Black folk in the Black Belt have never not been living in poverty,” Professor Jeffries said. “It’s not a cycle, it’s linear. It’s an unbroken line from slavery forward. And it’s really critical for understanding why there’s such a health crisis in these counties.”\r\nEthel Johnson, a nurse in Camden, a little town in Wilcox County, said diagnoses were coming so thick and fast in the 1990s that many people thought something had been added to the water.\r\n“Diabetes was coming up everywhere — among friends, family, church members,” she said in her small office adorned with posters of fruit and vegetables and one of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.\r\nAmputations became common. Eleanor Randolph, a retired schoolteacher in Livingston, said her cousin last year lost a toe and then, a few months later, a leg. He recently lost the other leg.\r\n“It kind of shakes you up,” she said. “It makes you think. It makes you want to do right.”\r\nBernice Wright, 40, a driver of a medical van, said several patients had lost so many of their limbs that they could no longer move without being lifted.\r\n“It’s like a shark did that to their body,” she said.\r\nBut that devastation, deeply frightening, is also inspiring change. Pamela Moton, 30, a resident of Pine Apple, cut a pink streak down a leafy trail on a recent morning, power walking in yoga pants and a fuchsia top to escape her genes, her culture and her history.\r\nHer father, now dead, had diabetes, and so did an aunt. Her mother, who weighs over 350 pounds and had a heart attack in her 50s, does not move around much anymore because of her weight.\r\n“That just like motivated me,” she said. “I thought: ‘I can’t get like that.’ No way can I get like that.”\r\nSome say prevention programs have helped keep them on track. Ms. Carpenter, the woman who cut her consumption of Coca-Cola, swears she would not have managed to change her habits without her weekly telephone call from a health counselor and monthly support groups, programs funded by the University of Alabama at Birmingham and the federal government. The meetings are fun, like church socials, she says. In two years, she has missed only one.\r\nFour of her 14 siblings and half siblings have diabetes. “If I wasn’t going to the class, I’d probably be on all kinds of medications,” she said.\r\nStill, it is unclear whether these improvements are affecting overall rates of new cases in the Black Belt. The C.D.C. does not measure new cases by county.\r\nDr. Monika Safford, an internist School of Medicine, at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, who has conducted random trials with community health workers in the Black Belt, found patients lost weight and improved blood pressure but had no change in glucose.\r\n“Individually there have been some successes, but as an epidemic, I don’t think we’ve made a dent,” said Dr. Roseanne Cook, a physician at the Pine Apple Health Center.\r\nOthers detect a meaningful shift in people’s attitudes. When Kim Catlin, a nurse with the Bryan W. Whitfield Memorial Hospital in Demopolis, began preaching better health in church basements and health centers in rural Alabama in 2007, she was met with blank stares.\r\n“There was no education about it, I mean nothing,” she recalled. “It was: ‘Blood sugar, what? Blood pressure who?’ They didn’t know what these things were.”\r\nNow, she said, “people are more conscious of what they are eating. They are more active.”\r\nFor Ms. Carpenter, the result has been a better life.\r\n“Baby, I got my self-esteem going and I’m gone,” she said. “It used to be, ‘All you ever do is sit up in the house.’ Now it’s ‘You ain’t never staying at home.’ ”"}
{"Title":"Rapid Increase of Diabetes Strains Middle East’s Health Agencies","Author":"SARA HAMDAN","Time":"JAN. 12, 2011","Tag":"Diabetes","Content":"Rapidly increasing diabetes rates in the Middle East and North Africa are giving rise to concerns about containing the epidemic and the financial burden of health care costs to the region’s governments.\r\n“There is absolutely no doubt that diabetes is one of the major problems our region is dealing with; we have extremely high rates and continuously rising trends,” said Dr. Ala Alwan, the assistant director general for noncommunicable diseases and mental health at the World Health Organization.\r\n“This all leads to low productivity, loss of household income and a rise in health care costs. Now we have clear evidence that such catastrophic expenses can drive families below the poverty line.”\r\nSix countries in the region are among the top 10 globally with the highest prevalence of diabetes. They include the United Arab Emirates, showing the second-highest rate in the world — behind only the tiny Pacific island state of Nauru — followed by Bahrain, Egypt, Kuwait, Oman and Saudi Arabia.\r\nThe International Diabetes Foundation estimates that 26.6 million adults in the Middle East and North Africa currently have diabetes, accounting for 9.3 percent of the world’s adults with the disease. The region spends $5.5 billion annually on diabetes, accounting for 14 percent of its total health care expenditure. In Qatar, expenditure is as high as $2,960 per person.\r\nThe figures are already worrying, but the foundation predicts worse to come. It says that over the next 20 years the number of people with diabetes in the region will almost double, reaching 51.7 million by 2030.\r\nThe disease greatly increases the risk of serious, costly illnesses and conditions, according to a briefing book prepared by the foundation for the region.\r\nIn Egypt, for example, 42 percent of people with diabetes experience early-stage eye disease and 5 percent are legally blind, the book shows. The disease also raises the risk of heart attack; in the United Arab Emirates, more than 10 percent of people diagnosed with diabetes have coronary heart disease.\r\nDiabetes is the leading cause of non-traumatic lower-limb amputations, which has afflicted 5 percent of Jordanians with the disease. In Saudi Arabia, 54 percent of people with diabetes show signs of early-stage kidney disease.\r\nThe reason for disproportionately high prevalence of diabetes in the Middle East lies mainly in lifestyle choices, according to doctors. Dr. Alwan points to the lack of physical activity, saying that up to half the region’s adults are physically inactive — and as many as 70 percent of women in, for example, Saudi Arabia.\r\nTobacco also adds to the risk of cardiovascular disease linked to diabetes, he said, with up to 55 percent of men in the region saying they smoke regularly.\r\nObesity rates in the Middle East and North Africa are among the highest in the world, particularly in the Gulf and, again, lifestyle choices are mainly to blame.\r\n“Diabetes and obesity are global problems, but the concern is the rapidity of increase in this region, and while we can’t change genetics, we can change lifestyle choices,” said Dr. Ghassan Darwiche, head of the Rashid Center for Diabetes and Research at Sheik Khalifa Hospital in Ajman, United Arab Emirates.\r\n“It is actually cheaper to eat fast food than cook healthy food at home here,” Dr. Darwiche added. “ There is an overrepresentation of cheap fast food in the region, and we need to involve fast food companies in this.”\r\nExercise, healthy eating and proper stress management can all contribute to reducing diabetes risk — something that seems simple enough. The problem lies in the fact that diabetes is not viewed as a serious disease, according to a diabetes awareness survey completed in 10 countries in the Middle East and North Africa in November by Novo Nordisk, a global health care company.\r\nSeventy-four percent of people at risk of developing diabetes have never been told that they are at risk, according to the survey, which was based on interviews with 3,000 respondents in Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia and the United Arab Emirates.\r\nWhile 83 percent of respondents agreed that prevalence of diabetes was rapidly increasing, 40 percent of those at risk considered diabetes to be a benign condition that was not always severe and 37 percent had never been screened or had a blood sugar measurement.\r\nHealth ministries in the region are working to improve these statistics by providing accessible screening opportunities for people and by training more doctors and nurses. In the Emirates, 75 nurses are currently enrolled in diabetes education programs financed by the government. Screening centers are placed in shopping malls, like the Mega Mall in Sharjah and Lulu Mall in Fujeirah, to encourage more people to check their blood sugar levels.\r\n“We need to engage every corner in this country, from the companies in the private sector to government institutions to shopping malls,” said Dr. Mahmoud Fikri, chairman of the National Diabetes Committee and chief executive for health policies affairs in the United Arab Emirates Ministry of Health. “We need to strengthen community participation and build a partnership for diabetes control.”\r\nThe ministry has also established an online registry for diabetes patients and health care providers, in a concerted effort to provide more data to help tackle the problem. With more accurate statistics and better-trained health care providers, the aim is to focus more effort on awareness and education about the risks of diabetes.\r\n“If we continue, there is a bleak inheritance for future generations,” said Dr. Hanif Hassan Ali Al Qassim, the minister of health in the Emirates. “We want the MENA region to have high-performing economies that offer people healthy and productive lives,” he said, using the acronym for the Middle East-North Africa region.\r\nHe added that heavy financial burdens were being placed on regional governments and that diabetes-related illnesses currently consumed 13 percent of the Emirate’s health care budget.\r\nFormer President Bill Clinton, whose foundation aims to raise diabetes awareness worldwide, was a keynote speaker at a MENA Diabetes Leadership Forum last month in Dubai.\r\n“This whole region is in the midst of a burst of modernization, with so many exciting things going on,” Mr. Clinton said. “But it can all be interrupted if we don’t block this diabetes epidemic.”"}
{"Title":"Studies Find More Genes Underlying Diabetes","Author":"NICHOLAS WADE","Time":"APRIL 26, 2007","Tag":"Diabetes","Content":"Four reports published today have tripled the number of variant genes known to underlie type 2 diabetes, providing researchers with a clutch of novel insights into the biology of a disease that affects 170 million people worldwide.\r\nThe sudden spate of new genes marks an acceleration, and perhaps a turning point, in the ability to find disease genes, the long promised payoff from the human genome project that began in 1989.\r\nToday’s reports bring the number of well attested genes involved in adult-onset diabetes up to 10, from the three known previously. The new genes do not immediately suggest any new therapy, but point to a novel biological basis for the disease, from which effective treatments could emerge in time.\r\nToday’s findings also mark an intensification of the race between DeCode Genetics, an Icelandic company that has dominated the gene-finding field for the last five years, and its competitors at universities in the United States and abroad.\r\nThe three academic groups, each of which is a large consortium of different groups, are led by David Altshuler of the Broad Institute, Michael Boehnke of the University of Michigan and Mark McCarthy of the University of Oxford in England.\r\nDeCode Genetics has been the first to find several major disease genes through skilful analysis of the Icelandic patient population and its well documented health care system. Its academic competitors, with the support of the National Institutes of Health, have had to describe and analyze the much wider range of genetic variation in the much more disparate American and European populations. This has required analyzing 10 million SNPs, or sites of common genetic variation on the human genome, and cataloging them in a project known as the HapMap.\r\nThe academic approach has been hampered by claims of disease genes that have proven notoriously inaccurate. \"It has not been a terribly productive field until the last two or three months,\" Dr. McCarthy said.\r\nBut with improved technology and better understanding of the sources of error, the academic groups seem at last to have gotten their technique working. Known as whole genome association, the technique has now helped them identify several genes not yet found by DeCode. \"The DeCode paper only found one new gene and we found three,\" Dr. McCarthy said.\r\nKari Stefansson, DeCode’s chief executive, said that the new diabetes genes found by the university consortiums contributed only a small degree of extra risk and that he did not have the time or resources to go after them. But he acknowledged that his academic competitors were breathing harder on his heels. \"I would be a fool if I thought these guys would never pull their act together, and besides, if we were the only ones to do this it would be an insupportable burden.\"\r\nTrained as a neurologist at the University of Chicago and Harvard, Dr. Stefansson is no stranger to the sharp elbows sometimes wielded in biomedical research, and indeed has a good pair of his own. He said his report of an important new diabetes gene, known as TCF7L2, had been rejected by both Nature and Science, two leading scientific journals, because of negative reports from his competitors, and he chided Science for now publishing genes of lesser effect from the same people.\r\nA representative for Science declined to comment on whether the journal had rejected Dr. Stefansson’s earlier paper.\r\nAnother mark of the quickening competition is that the reports from three academic groups were rushed into electronic publication today by Science, so as to appear at the same time as DeCode Genetics’ report in the journal Nature Genetics.\r\nSeveral researchers said that the new diabetes studies, and a forthcoming report on seven major diseases prepared by the Welcome Trust in London, marked a turning point in the pursuit of the genes that underlie such common diseases as diabetes, stroke, cancer and schizophrenia. The variant genes are common but each makes only a small contribution to disease, rendering them hard to identify.\r\nThere is considerable overlap in the diabetes genes in today’s four reports, giving the authors confidence that at last their whole genome association method is producing reliable results.\r\n\"There was no sense of progress\" in tracking down the genes of diabetes or other common diseases, Dr. Altshuler said. The logjam started to break a year ago with DeCode’s report of its TF7T2 gene, and the consistent findings reported by the three academic centers today \"has to be acknowledged as substantial progress,\" Dr. Altshuler said.\r\nDr. Boehnke agreed, saying, \"It’s very exciting to have results in which we truly believe.” He said that up to now diabetes research had been what his professor warned would be \"a geneticist’s nightmare\".\r\nThe importance of the new genes is that they point to previously unknown pathways involved in diabetes. Dr. Altshuler agreed with Dr. Stefansson’s view that DeCode’s TF7C2 gene has the largest effect on diabetes but said the other genes provide new insights regardless of the size of their effects. \"The fact that none of the genes found were on anyone’s radar screen shows how much there is to learn,\" he said.\r\n\"I tip my hat to DeCode,\" he said. \"But the technology is now widely available,\" and in his view the only barrier to other teams contributing to gene discovery is for them to maintain the high standards of statistical rigor developed by the three academic consortiums.\r\nSeveral of the new variant genes make the pancreatic beta cells produce less insulin, Dr. Altshuler said. That suggests that diabetes may start as a disease of too little insulin production, even though patients turn up in the doctor’s office making too much insulin, to which their tissues have become resistant. \"A year ago, no one was talking this way, but now when you go to a meeting, people are scratching their heads and saying ’Could this be true?’\" Dr. Altshuler said.\r\nThe variant genes found so far account for only 2 to 20 percent of the overall risk of diabetes, implying there are many more to be found. The present genes are not sufficient to distinguish reliably between people at low or high risk for diabetes, Dr. Boehnke said."}
{"Title":"Heart Scans: Finding More Than You May Need to Know","Author":"GINA KOLATA","Time":"MAY 1, 2007","Tag":"Heart Disease","Content":"WHEN George Skouras, an investment manager in New York, turned 52, he decided to go for a complete physical exam. He felt perfectly healthy, but wanted to know if there was anything to worry about.\r\nSo he went to a specialty clinic for tests. Among them were heart scans. The news was not good. Mr. Skouras had a plaque buildup in his coronary arteries, partly obstructing two.\r\nWhat, he wondered, should he do? He knew his cholesterol level was a bit high. But he hesitated to take statins, drugs that can lower cholesterol levels, concerned that side effects might emerge over decades. And though he worries that statins are not completely safe, most cardiologists cite large, long-term studies finding that the drugs are rarely risky and that benefits, for the populations studied, are indisputable.\r\nHis quandary, heart specialists said, reflects the difficult questions that a new era in heart disease assessment has produced: do new tests, like heart scans, work to people’s benefit? How much testing for heart disease makes a difference, and what tests should people have? What should you do if you have a test and it shows something you did not expect?\r\nThe answers, as often happens in medicine, depend on whom you ask.\r\nMr. Skouras consulted several experts, including Dr. Peter Libby, the chief of cardiovascular medicine at the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston. Dr. Libby says he is hearing from more patients like Mr. Skouras. They undergo tests for heart disease, but once they have the results, they are not sure what to do.\r\nNearly everyone agrees on the basics. Adults should know their cholesterol, blood-sugar and blood-pressure levels and should keep them within national guidelines. It is often reasonable to try dieting and exercising, but if that fails, most people should take prescription drugs.\r\nIf everyone took those steps, that alone could make the heart attack rate plummet, says Dr. Daniel Levy, the director of the Framingham Heart Study, a federal study of the population of Framingham, Mass. Dr. Levy said the study indicated that nearly every heart attack from age 50 to age 95 could have been prevented if people had their blood pressure, blood sugar and cholesterol under control at age 50 and did not smoke. Yet, he noted, only 5 percent of the nation’s 50-year-olds do this.\r\nBut the testing question gets murky after that. Some, like the United States Preventive Services Task Force, a federally sponsored panel of experts in primary care and prevention, says that most people should take only basic tests. “The message we are trying to get across is that more testing is not always beneficial,” said the panel’s chairman, Dr. Ned Calonge.\r\nThe concern is that seemingly innocuous tests will give false-positive results, which lead to more tests and even treatments, when there was nothing wrong to begin with.\r\nWhen it comes to people like Mr. Skouras, who know they are at increased risk of heart disease — remember, his cholesterol level was too high — Dr. Calonge wonders what more tests can possibly reveal. The only thing Mr. Skouras can do to protect himself against a heart attack is to lower his cholesterol level, advice he already has.\r\nDr. Daniel Rader, who directs the lipid program at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, said he might be faced, for example, with deciding how to advise a 40-year-old man with a family history of premature heart disease, and whose LDL cholesterol is 125, at the high end of normal. Should this man take a statin to lower his cholesterol further?\r\n“No one knows,” Dr. Rader said. The guidelines say he does not need the drug. Yet, Dr. Rader says, his family history is worrisome. Many people like him will have a heart attack.\r\nDr. Rader, like other heart specialists, said he often turned to more tests to assess how great the person’s risk really is. For example, he may test for blood proteins whose presence in elevated levels can indicate increased heart attack risk. Dr. Rader said he also he might suggest heart scans, like those Mr. Skouras had.\r\nMr. Skouras decided to see how far he could go with diet and exercise instead of taking statins. He was not fat, but he lost 16 pounds, reducing his LDL cholesterol level by 30 percent, to 140. That, though, is not as low as Dr. Libby would like.\r\nSo Mr. Skouras remains troubled. As he sees it, it’s all a matter of probabilities — the chance that a statin will prevent a heart attack for him personally, which no one can tell him for sure, versus the chance that a statin will turn out, after decades of use, to have been worse than nothing for him personally. And that, of course, is also unknown.\r\n“The frustrating thing,” Mr. Skouras said, “is no one can really tell you cause and effect — that if you do this, this is what you will get.”"}
{"Title":"Eating Your Way to a Sturdy Heart","Author":"TARA PARKER-POPE","Time":"MAY 13, 2008","Tag":"Heart Disease","Content":"MOST people think heart-healthy living involves sacrifice. Give up your favorite foods. Break a sweat. Lose weight. But some of the best things you can do for your heart do not involve deprivation or medication. Simple and even pleasurable changes in the foods you eat can rival medication in terms of the benefit to your heart.\r\n“Almost everyone has something they can do in their diet or activity that will impact their risk of heart disease,” said Dr. Graham Colditz, adjunct professor of epidemiology at Washington University in St. Louis. “It’s not about taking anything to the extremes of major deprivation, extreme marathon running or becoming a vegetarian.”\r\nEven so, many people are not getting the message. While doctors still advise patients to diet, exercise and stop smoking, the medical community has adopted an almost singular focus on cholesterol-lowering drugs as the fastest and best way to battle heart disease. Americans spend $18 billion a year on cholesterol-reducing drugs, making them the nation’s biggest-selling class of drugs.\r\nClearly, drug treatments have played a role in the health of American hearts. Since 1950, age-adjusted death rates from cardiovascular disease have dropped 60 percent, a statistic praised by government health officials.\r\nAverage blood pressure and cholesterol levels are dropping, partly because of drug treatments. But drugs don’t get all the credit. A sharp drop in smoking has had a huge impact on heart health. And major changes in diet have also played a role. Surveys of the food supply suggest that consumption of saturated fat and cholesterol has decreased since the early 1900s. Medical care has also improved.\r\nBut an important lesson from the last 50 years is that when it comes to improving heart health, it is important to look beyond the medicine cabinet.\r\nJust a few small changes — eating more fish, vegetables, nuts and fiber — can have a major impact on your risk for heart problems. For some people, drinking moderate amounts of wine may offer additional benefits. Even a 55-year-old man who is about 20 pounds overweight and does not exercise regularly will have a heart-disease risk far below average if he regularly consumes fish, nuts, fiber and vegetables and drinks moderate amounts of wine.\r\nIt’s hard to believe that such simple food changes can make a meaningful difference, but data from hundreds of studies show they can.\r\nFor instance, a review of nearly 100 studies evaluating various cholesterol-lowering agents and diets showed just how potent fish can be as a heart protector. In studies of people who consume diets rich in omega-3 fatty acids like those found in fish, heart risk was 23 percent lower compared with a control group. The 2005 review appeared in The Archives of Internal Medicine.\r\nThe same report also reviewed studies of statin use and showed a 13 percent lower heart risk. Because it was not a head-to-head comparison, it cannot be concluded that eating fish is better than using statins. But the results clearly show the powerful effect of fish in the diet.\r\nMany studies of fish consumption and heart health are based on observation of Eskimos and people in Mediterranean regions. And random clinical trials have shown that consuming omega-3 fatty acids can reduce heart attacks and cardiovascular death. These fatty acids can also slow the progress of atherosclerosis in coronary patients, according to the American Heart Association.\r\nSeveral studies now show that regular consumption of omega-3s from a variety of sources, including fish, nuts and soybean oil, can lower cardiovascular risk as much as 60 percent, according to a 2006 review in The American Journal of Cardiology.\r\nIt doesn’t take much fish. Doctors recommend eating it, particularly fatty kinds like mackerel, lake trout, herring, sardines, albacore tuna and salmon, just twice a week.\r\nPeople worry about exposure to mercury and toxins from fish, but experts say that for middle-age and older men and postmenopausal women, the benefits of fish far outweigh the risks of exposure to environmental pollutants.\r\nThe data on increasing consumption of fiber-rich foods, vegetables and nuts is also compelling. A 2001 report in Nutrition Reviews concluded that eating just a handful of nuts (about three to four tablespoons) five times a week can reduce risk of coronary artery disease between 25 and 40 percent.\r\nAnd while everyone knows it is good to eat your vegetables, many people do not realize how easy it really is to consume five to nine servings of fruits and vegetables a day. Just having a salad of leafy greens (two cups) with tomatoes and half a cup of broccoli, for instance, totals four servings. If you had juice with breakfast, you’re already up to five by lunchtime.\r\nWhether to add alcohol to your daily diet is more controversial. Increasingly, studies support the idea that drinking a small amount each day — no more than one to two servings — is better for you than not drinking. Large observational studies show that drinking moderate amounts of alcohol can lower the risk of dying in a given year by about 25 percent, compared with those who rarely drink. But it’s not true for everyone. Excessive use of alcohol can lead to addiction, traffic accidents and potentially fatal medical problems.\r\nEven small amounts of alcohol can increase risk for certain health worries, like breast and colon cancer. Although those risks are generally offset by the extra heart benefits, some people may decide it is not worth it. Much of the research on alcohol’s benefit comes from studies that observe people over time rather than from controlled clinical trials, which are more reliable. So while there is a strong association with moderate alcohol consumption and better health, the results are not conclusive.\r\nMaking better food choices won’t always produce obvious results, like weight loss. But substituting fish for red meat, high-fiber foods for processed pastries and eating more vegetables may push more fattening foods off your plate, and at the least, prevent weight gain. Add a half-hour walk after dinner and you have gone a long way toward lowering heart risk."}
{"Title":"Lessons of Heart Disease, Learned and Ignored","Author":"GINA KOLATA","Time":"APRIL 8, 2007","Tag":"Heart Disease","Content":"Keith Orr thought he would surprise his doctor when he came for a checkup.\r\nHis doctor had told him to have a weight-loss operation to reduce the amount of food his stomach could hold, worried because Mr. Orr, at 6 feet 2 inches, weighed 278 pounds. He also had a blood sugar level so high he was on the verge of diabetes and a strong family history of early death from heart attacks. And Mr. Orr, who is 44, had already had a heart attack in 1998 when he was 35.\r\nBut Mr. Orr had a secret plan. He had been quietly dieting and exercising for four months and lost 45 pounds. He envisioned himself proudly telling his doctor what he had done, sure his tests would show a huge drop in his blood sugar and cholesterol levels. He planned to confess that he had also stopped taking all of his prescription drugs for heart disease.\r\nAfter all, he reasoned, with his improved diet and exercise, he no longer needed the drugs. And, anyway, he had never taken his medications regularly, so stopping altogether would not make much difference, he decided.\r\nBut the surprise was not what Mr. Orr had anticipated. On Feb. 6, one week before the appointment with his doctor, Mr. Orr was working out at a gym near his home in Boston when he felt a tightness in his chest. It was the start of a massive heart attack, with the sort of blockage in an artery that doctors call the widow-maker.\r\nHe survived, miraculously, with little or no damage to his heart. But his story illustrates the reasons that heart disease still kills more Americans than any other disease, as it has for nearly a century.\r\nMedical research has revealed enough about the causes and prevention of heart attacks that they could be nearly eliminated. Yet nearly 16 million Americans are living with coronary heart disease, and nearly half a million die from it each year.\r\nIt’s not that prevention doesn’t work, and it’s not that once someone has a heart attack there is little to be done. In fact, said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute at the National Institutes of Health, age-adjusted death rates for heart disease dropped precipitously in the past few decades, and prevention and better treatment are major reasons why.\r\nBut the concern, Dr. Nabel and others say, is that much more could be done. In many ways, scientists’ hard-won and increasingly detailed understanding of what causes heart disease and what to do for it often goes unknown or ignored.\r\nStudies reveal, for example, that people have only about an hour to get their arteries open during a heart attack if they are to avoid permanent heart damage. Yet, recent surveys find, fewer than 10 percent get to a hospital that fast, sometimes because they are reluctant to acknowledge what is happening. And most who reach the hospital quickly do not receive the optimal treatment — many American hospitals are not fully equipped to provide it but are reluctant to give up heart patients because they are so profitable.\r\nAnd new studies reveal that even though drugs can protect people who already had a heart attack from having another, many patients get the wrong doses and most, Mr. Orr included, stop taking the drugs in a matter of months. They should take the drugs for the rest of their lives.\r\n“We’ve done pretty well,” Dr. Nabel said. “But we could be doing much better. I’ve heard some people refer to it as the rule of halves. Half the people who need to be treated are treated and half who are treated are adequately treated.”\r\nThe result, heart researchers say, is a huge disconnect between what is possible and what is actually happening.\r\nCrucial Miscalculations\r\nKeith Orr’s story has themes that resonate with every cardiologist. He did many things right, but also made some crucial miscalculations that were so common that nearly every patient makes them, cardiologists say. But not everyone comes out as well.\r\nMr. Orr anticipated a pleasant day on Feb. 6, starting with a workout at his gym, then lunch with a friend before he went to work at Smith & Wollensky, a steakhouse where he is a manager.\r\nHe arrived at the gym around noon and lifted weights, concentrating on the pectoral muscles of his chest. Then he moved on to an elliptical cross-trainer for cardiovascular exercise.\r\nAfter half an hour on the elliptical, Mr. Orr felt a tightness in his chest. “I attributed it to the weight training,” he said, but stopped exercising, showered, dressed and walked to his car.\r\n“I felt really bad, out of sorts,” he said. The pressure in his chest would ease off and then intensify, and now he was sweating profusely and was nauseated. When he arrived at the restaurant, he told his friend Darrin Friedman that he would have to beg off from lunch. “I feel like hell,” he told Mr. Friedman.\r\nHe went home and lay on his bed.\r\n“I knew at that point that it was not a pulled muscle,” Mr. Orr said. “It’s a completely different feeling of pressure and discomfort. You feel as though something is genuinely wrong.”\r\nIt was 3:15. And the pain was no longer intermittent. It was constant.\r\nMr. Orr called Mr. Friedman and asked him to drive him to an emergency room. A few minutes later, the two set off for Brigham and Women’s Hospital, about a 10-minute drive.\r\n“Keith was hunched over and he didn’t put his seat belt on,” Mr. Friedman said. “I kept asking him, ‘Is it getting better or getting worse or staying the same?’ For the first 10 minutes he said, ‘It’s about the same.’ Then, when we were a block or so away, he said: ‘I’m not doing well. I think it’s getting worse.’ “\r\nWhen they arrived at the hospital’s emergency department, Mr. Friedman explained that his friend was having chest pains. Immediately, Mr. Orr was wheeled off for an electrocardiogram, showing his heart’s electrical signals. It was ominous, including one pattern called the tombstone T wave because patients who had it died in the days before there were aggressive treatments to open arteries.\r\nThe next thing Mr. Orr knew, he was being rushed to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for a procedure to open his artery.\r\n“They said: ‘We’re going now. We’re going now,’ ” Mr. Orr recalled. “That really scared me. Someone kept yelling: ‘Do you have his labs? Do you have his labs?’ Someone else said, ‘We’ll transfer them later.’ ”\r\nThe electrocardiogram was at 3:45 p.m., roughly 30 minutes after his symptoms changed from intermittent to constant and 5 minutes after he got to the hospital.\r\nAt 3:52 p.m., Dr. Ashvin Pande, a cardiology fellow, was chatting in the hallway when he was called to the catheterization lab.\r\n“Big M.I. coming in,” a nurse told Dr. Pande, using the abbreviation for myocardial infarction, or heart attack. At the time, the room was occupied — a patient was lying on the table for an elective procedure. He was quickly wheeled out and Mr. Orr was wheeled in. It was 3:56 p.m.\r\nWithin minutes, Dr. James M. Kirshenbaum, director of acute interventional cardiology, assisted by Dr. Pande, threaded a thin tube, like a long and narrow straw, from an artery in Mr. Orr’s groin to his heart. They injected a dye to make Mr. Orr’s arteries visible to an X-ray and they saw the problem — a huge clot in his heart’s left anterior descending artery, blocking blood flow to most of his heart.\r\nThe quickest option was to open that artery with a balloon and keep it open with a stent, a tiny mesh cage, if possible.\r\nIt worked — the balloon shattered the clot and pushed the debris against the artery wall and the stent held the artery open. Then a different problem arose. When the large clot was pushed aside, the debris was shoved against the opening of a small artery that branched from the larger one, much as a snowplow clearing a street can block a driveway.\r\n“We made a calculated decision that it would be worth sacrificing the branch to secure the main vessel,” Dr. Pande said. But, fortunately, they were able to insert another balloon through the stent and into the small artery, opening it too.\r\nAt 4:43, the procedure was over and Mr. Orr was wheeled to the coronary intensive care unit. He had been awake but sedated and experienced what he said was the amazing feeling of having his artery opened. “As soon as the balloon goes in, all the pain disappears,” he said. “You know immediately.”\r\nThe cardiologists who saved his life walked out of the room, grinning and exhilarated.\r\n“This adrenaline rush is why people like me go into cardiology,” Dr. Pande said.\r\nThe First Call: An Ambulance\r\nMr. Orr was incredibly lucky, said Dr. Elliott Antman, director of the coronary care unit at Brigham and Women’s Hospital. He ended up with little or no damage to his heart, even though he teetered between lifesaving decisions and critical miscalculations in his moments of crisis.\r\nThe first lifesaving decision was to go to a hospital soon after his chest pain began. But the miscalculation was to call his friend for a ride. He should have called an ambulance.\r\nHad his friend gotten caught in traffic, Mr. Orr might have been dead or sustained serious injury to his heart. He might have had to go to a rehabilitation center and learn special tactics for conserving energy, like sliding a coffeepot along a counter instead of lifting it.\r\nWhat few patients realize, Dr. Antman said, is that a serious heart attack is as much of an emergency as being shot.\r\n“We deal with it as if it is a gunshot wound to the heart,” Dr. Antman said.\r\nCardiologists call it the golden hour, that window of time when they have a chance to save most of the heart muscle when an artery is blocked.\r\nBut that urgency, cardiologists say, has been one of the most difficult messages to get across, in part because people often deny or fail to appreciate the symptoms of a heart attack. The popular image of a heart attack is all wrong.\r\nIt’s the Hollywood heart attack, said Dr. Eric Peterson, a cardiologist and heart disease researcher at Duke University.\r\n“That’s the man clutching his chest, grimacing in pain and going down,” Dr. Peterson said. “That’s what people imagine a heart attack is like. What they don’t imagine is that it’s not so much pain as pressure, a feeling of heaviness, shortness of breath.”\r\nMost patients describe something like Mr. Orr’s symptoms — discomfort in the chest that may, or may not, radiate into the arms or neck, the back, the jaw, or the stomach. Many also have nausea or shortness of breath. Or they break out in a cold sweat, or have a feeling of anxiety or impending doom, or have blue lips or hands or feet, or feel a sudden exhaustion.\r\nBut symptoms often are less distinctive in elderly patients, especially women. Their only sign may be a sudden feeling of exhaustion just walking across a room. Some say they broke out in a sweat. Afterward, they may recall a feeling of pressure in their chest or pain radiating from their chest but at the time, they say, they paid little attention.\r\nPatients with diabetes might have no obvious symptoms at all other than sudden, extreme fatigue. It’s not clear why diabetics often have these so-called silent heart attacks — one hypothesis attributes it to damage diabetes can cause to nerves that carry pain signals.\r\n“I say to patients, ‘Be alert to the possibility that you may be short of breath,’ ” Dr. Antman said. “Every day you walk down your driveway to go to your mailbox. If you discover one day that you can only walk halfway there, you are so fatigued that you can’t walk another foot, I want to hear about that. You might be having a heart attack.”\r\nOther times, said Dr. George Sopko, a cardiologist at the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, symptoms like pressure in the chest come and go. That is because a blood clot blocking an artery is breaking up a bit, reforming, breaking and reforming. It was what happened to Mr. Orr when he was at the gym and meeting his friend afterward.\r\n“It’s a pre-heart attack,” Dr. Sopko said. A blood vessel is on its way to being completely blocked. “You need to call 911.”\r\nBut most people — often hoping it is not a heart attack, wondering if their symptoms will fade, not wanting to be alarmist — hesitate far too long before calling for help.\r\n“The single biggest delay is from the onset of symptoms and calling 911,” said Dr. Bernard Gersh, a cardiologist at the Mayo Clinic. “The average time is 111 minutes, and it hasn’t changed in 10 years.”\r\n‘Time Is Muscle’\r\nAt least half of all patients never call an ambulance. Instead, in the throes of a heart attack, they drive themselves to the emergency room or are driven there by a friend or family member. Or they take a taxi. Or they walk.\r\nPatients often say they were embarrassed by the thought of an ambulance arriving at their door.\r\n“Calling 911 seems like such a project,” Mr. Orr said. “I reserve it for car accidents and exploding appliances. I feel like if I can walk and talk and breathe I should just get here.”\r\nIt is an understandable response, but one that can be fatal, cardiologists say.\r\n“If you come to the hospital unannounced or if you drive yourself there, you’re burning time,” Dr. Antman said. “And time is muscle,” he added, meaning that heart muscle is dying as the minutes tick away.\r\nThere may be false alarms, Dr. Sopko said.\r\n“But it is better to be checked out and find out it’s not a problem than to have a problem and not have the therapy,” he said.\r\nCalling an ambulance promptly is only part of the issue, heart researchers say. There also is the question of how, or even whether, the patient gets either of two types of treatment to open the blocked arteries, known as reperfusion therapy.\r\nOne is to open arteries with a clot-dissolving drug like tPA, for tissue plasminogen activator.\r\n“These have been breakthrough therapies,” said Dr. Joseph P. Ornato, a cardiologist and emergency medicine specialist who is medical director for the City of Richmond, Va. “But the hooker is that even the best of the clot buster drugs typically only open up 60 to 70 percent of blocked arteries — nowhere close to 100 percent.”\r\nThe drugs also make patients vulnerable to bleeding, Dr. Ornato said.\r\nOne in 200 patients bleeds into the brain, having a stroke from the treatment meant to save the heart.\r\nThe other way is with angioplasty, the procedure Mr. Orr got. Cardiologists say it is the preferred method under ideal circumstances.\r\nStents have recently been questioned for those who are just having symptoms like shortness of breath. In those cases, drugs often work as well as stents. But during a heart attack or in the early hours afterward, stents are the best way to open arteries and prevent damage. That, though, requires a cardiac catheterization laboratory, practiced doctors and staff on call 24 hours a day. The result is that few get this treatment.\r\n“We now are seeing really phenomenal results in experienced hands,” Dr. Ornato said. “We can open 95 to 96 percent of arteries, and bleeding in the brain is virtually unheard of. It’s a safer route if it is done by very experienced people and if it is done promptly. Those are big ifs.”\r\nThe ifs were not a problem for Mr. Orr. His decision to go to Brigham and Women’s Hospital proved exactly right. But he did not know that when he chose the hospital — he chose it because his doctor was affiliated with Brigham.\r\nA Need for More Angioplasty\r\nCurrently, 30 percent of patients who are candidates for reperfusion do not receive it, and of those who do, only 18 percent are treated with angioplasty, said Dr. Alice Jacobs, director of the cardiac catheterization laboratory at Boston University School of Medicine and a past president of the American Heart Association. Of the nation’s 5,000 acute care hospitals, Dr. Jacobs said, only 1,200 provide angioplasty.\r\nMost hospitals, she said, cannot offer angioplasty because they do not have enough patients for a team of doctors to maintain their skills. An obvious solution would be to make heart attack care more like trauma care — sending patients to the nearest hospital that can provide angioplasty as quickly as possible. But that is not always easy, Dr. Jacobs said, because hospitals do not want to lose cardiac patients.\r\nA major reason, she said, is financial. Hospitals are reimbursed by Medicare according an index that measures the acuity of medical conditions they treat.\r\n“If your cardiac patients are transferred, your acuity index goes down, which lowers overall Medicare reimbursement for other problems like pneumonia and renal disease,” Dr. Jacobs said.\r\nIt is also difficult for patients who live in rural areas, where community hospitals are too small to offer angioplasty and larger hospitals that do offer it are hours away. Minnesota is experimenting with a program using helicopters to transport patients quickly. But for most rural patients elsewhere, angioplasty is almost an impossibility.\r\nDr. Antman suggests that heart disease patients ask their doctor if there is a hospital nearby that does angioplasty around the clock. If so, they might want to discuss with their doctor whether to ask that an ambulance take them there if they are having a heart attack.\r\nIt is the sort of advice that makes cardiologists nervous — they do not want to encourage patients to dictate treatment. But, Dr. Antman said, if it is feasible to get to an angioplasty-providing hospital within an hour, “in most cases that would be preferable.”\r\nGetting the Proper Therapy\r\nOpening an artery is only the start of treatment. The next part is at least as problematic: Patients have to get the right drugs, in the right doses, and have to take them for the rest of their lives.\r\n“Care is getting a lot better,” Dr. Peterson said. “But the only caveat is that they are only really looking at, Did you get therapy? No one is looking too closely at, Did you do it right?”\r\nFor example, he said, a recent study found that heart attack patients were getting blood-thinning prescription drugs to prevent clots, as they should, but up to 40 percent were getting the wrong dose, usually one too high.\r\nAnd even if every prescription were exactly right, as many as half of all patients do just what Mr. Orr did after his first heart attack. They stop taking many or all of their drugs.\r\nSometimes it is a matter of communication.\r\n“The information did not get to the primary doctor and the primary doctor did not know to renew the prescription,” Dr. Peterson said. “When we talk to patients, they say: ‘No one communicated to me the importance of being on the medications long term. I thought I would only need them for three months, I thought it would be like an antibiotic. I thought they put in a stent so why do I need a drug?’ ”\r\nBut there may be more to it than ignorance. There also is the image those pills convey of a sick person.\r\nMr. Orr said he did not like to think of himself as someone who had to take a fistful of pills every day. Even the recommended daily aspirin seemed superfluous, he thought.\r\n“I think I sort of pooh-poohed the notion that one tablet of aspirin each day would do anything,” Mr. Orr said.\r\nWhat it does is make blood less likely to clot. In Mr. Orr’s case, Dr. Antman said, it is likely that when Mr. Orr was exercising on the cross-trainer, an area of plaque ruptured. Then a clot began to form in the area, eventually blocking the artery.\r\nThe problem was not exercise, which is good for people with heart disease, but Mr. Orr’s decision not to take his medications, Dr. Antman said. If he had been taking aspirin that clot would have had more difficulty forming and growing.\r\nDr. Antman has a message for patients: With a disease as serious as heart disease, those who take responsibility are often the ones who survive.\r\nHaving a heart attack, even if it turns out well, as his did, is a life-altering experience, Mr. Orr said.\r\nHis first heart attack, Mr. Orr said, “came out of the blue.” When he was discharged from the hospital, he was terrified that it would happen again when he was alone and unable to call for help. “I had a really hard time with it,” he said. “I only stayed in my own house for one night and then I moved to a friend’s house for two weeks.”\r\nNow Mr. Orr plans to be serious about taking his medication and getting back to his diet and exercise program. He will call an ambulance if he ever has symptoms again. Still, he hates to think of himself as a patient. “I’m a little freaked out that I will have to take medication for the foreseeable eternity,” Mr. Orr said.\r\nBut the day after he got home from the hospital, he thought about what had happened.\r\n“The gravity of the situation just sort of clicked,” Mr. Orr said. “I started to cry.”"}
{"Title":"Paying Attention to That Pain in the Chest: It Could Be Serious","Author":"FRAN HAWTHORNE","Time":"JUNE 5, 2005","Tag":"Heart Disease","Content":"WOMEN and men share one characteristic when it comes to heart disease: it's the leading killer of both. But otherwise, much is different -- and not always to women's benefit. For instance, women don't usually experience the classic chest-clutching symptoms. Their first warning sign may be pain in the jaw or neck, fatigue, shortness of breath, a stomachache or nausea, all of which could be associated with another condition. Even the classic chest pain can be misinterpreted. \"A lot of women come to me saying their bras feel too tight,\" said Dr. Maryann McLaughlin, assistant professor of cardiology at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine in Manhattan.\r\nSome risks for heart disease are inherited. Luckily, however, women can do a lot to mitigate the other major risk factors. The following are areas where women can address their vulnerabilities:\r\nCIGARETTES -- \"Never smoke. Period. End of story,\" said Dr. Suzanne Steinbaum, medical director of the Center for Cardiac and Pulmonary Health at Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan. Experts say that smoking increases the risk of heart disease more than threefold because it constricts the blood vessels and raises blood pressure.\r\nOBESITY -- In itself this is a risk factor for heart disease, and it also plays a part in other conditions that can increase the danger. There is no special cardiovascular diet, just the standard nutritional advice to eat more whole grains, fresh fruits and vegetables, low-fat dairy products and lean meat and less saturated fat and refined sugar. Some physicians would add food with omega-3 fatty acids, like fish, and folic acid, found in cereal and whole-wheat bread. The other half of the regimen is to do at least 30 minutes of moderate exercise daily, which can be as undemanding as a brisk walk or even housework. Abdominal fat is particularly tied to heart disease.\r\nDIABETES -- The disease is a double whammy for women. More women than men are diabetic, and diabetic women are more at risk for heart disease than diabetic men. Diabetes increases the threat of heart disease about 50 percent.\r\nDiabetes can be delayed, and even prevented, by exercise and a low-fat, low-sugar diet. If that is not enough, women might need a drug like metformin to increase the body's responsiveness to insulin.\r\nWomen who are at the greatest risk -- those who are overweight and also over 45, with high cholesterol or blood pressure or with a family history of the disease -- can ask for their blood sugar levels to be tested as part of their regular checkup.\r\nCHOLESTEROL -- There are three main lipids, or fats, in the blood that can be strong predictors of heart disease; all work slightly differently in women and in men.\r\nThe level of LDL, or so-called bad cholesterol, should be under 100 milligrams per deciliter of blood, while HDL, or \"good\" cholesterol, should be above 50. Premenopausal women naturally have a relatively low level of LDL and relatively high HDL, most likely because of estrogen effects. Even older women continue to have levels of HDL that are about 10 milligrams above men's.\r\nSadly, women's natural advantages do not carry over to triglycerides, the third lipid. These should be kept below 150 milligrams per deciliter. The level, however, tends to rise after menopause, and high levels are more strongly correlated with coronary heart disease in women than in men.\r\nThe cholesterol and triglyceride numbers can be monitored through a simple, fasting blood test as part of a routine physical.\r\nA low-fat diet can do wonders to bring cholesterol to the right range. If that does not work, or if people have two or more risk factors, doctors often prescribe a statin drug like Lipitor or Zocor. There has been a lot of enthusiasm about the ability of these drugs to stave off coronary problems for both sexes, but they seem to be more effective in men.\r\nHIGH BLOOD PRESSURE -- This can lead to stroke as well as heart disease. Chalk up another disadvantage for females: after age 60, they are more likely to have this condition.\r\nIdeally, blood pressure should be no higher than 120 over 80. Dr. Elizabeth G. Nabel, director of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, suggests having the doctor check the level twice during an office visit because the anxiety of the appointment can send the scores shooting up at first.\r\nANXIETY -- Stress, depression, social isolation and anxiety can be factors in heart disease. \"Women should make sure they have a good support network, and doctors should be on the lookout for depression,\" said Dr. Lori J. Mosca, director of preventive cardiology at New York-Presbyterian Hospital.\r\nASPIRIN -- Should women take this medicine as part of a daily regimen? For more than 15 years, doctors have known that an aspirin a day helps men over 45 avoid heart attacks. But the finding was never tested on women. Finally, definitive word came in March from a study done by Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston: aspirin does not significantly help women under 65 avoid a first attack, but it does help them avoid one type of stroke -- the exact opposite of what happens with men.\r\nThat finding has not really changed standard medical practice, because women do not usually get their first heart attacks until after 65 anyway. So most physicians continue to recommend preventive low-dose (81-milligram) aspirin for women under 65 only if they have two or more coronary risk factors, and for all women over 65."}
{"Title":"In Heart Disease, the Focus Shifts to Women","Author":"DENISE GRADY","Time":"April 18, 2006","Tag":"Heart Disease","Content":"Kim Kachmann-Geltz did everything right. She ran five miles a day, dutifully ate oatmeal and wheat toast, stayed slim, never smoked. Her blood pressure was perfect. Her genes, she thought, were lucky: her great-grandmother had lived to 102.\r\n\"I'm the last person in the world I could ever imagine having heart disease,\" said Ms. Kachmann-Geltz, of Hilton Head, S.C., who is 39 and the mother of three children.\r\nBut since 2003 she has suffered from angina, chest pain caused by inadequate blood flow to the heart. In addition, one chamber of her heart has shown signs of enlargement, and her heart valves do not work properly. She takes four heart medicines and may eventually need more. Even with the drugs, chest pain keeps her from running. She walks instead, and does yoga.\r\n\"It's not a death sentence,\" she said. \"You don't have to live your life depressed.\"\r\nBut her outlook is a mixed message. She describes her prognosis as good and yet also says the disease may shorten her life.\r\n\"We just don't know,\" she said. \"That much has been made clear to me.\"\r\nHer case is unusual: angina more often strikes older women. Still, coronary artery disease is the leading cause of death in women over 25, killing more than 250,000 a year in the United States. Before they reach their 60's, women are less likely than men to develop heart problems, but once the disease does occur, women often fare worse than men.\r\nSince 1984, more women than men have died each year from heart disease, and though overall coronary death rates have dropped in recent decades, most of the improvements have been in men.\r\nPuzzling differences have emerged between men and women with heart disease, making it plain that past studies, mostly done on men, do not always apply to women. Researchers have come to realize that to improve diagnosis and treatment for women, they must sort out the differences.\r\n\"Every time we turn around, we find more gender differences, so it's important to study,\" said Dr. C. Noel Bairey Merz, a cardiologist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.\r\nAmong the differences are these:\r\nWomen with chest pain and other heart symptoms are more likely than men to have clear coronary arteries when tests are performed, a surprising result that suggests there may be another cause for their problems.\r\nWhen women do have blocked coronary arteries, they tend to be older than men with similar blockages and to have worse symptoms, including more chest pain and disability. These women are also more likely to have other problems like high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes, which may make surgery riskier. And they are more likely than men to develop heart failure, a weakening of the heart muscle that can be debilitating and ultimately fatal.\r\nWhen women have bypass surgery or balloon procedures for coronary blockages, they are less likely than men to have successful outcomes, and they are more likely to suffer from bad side effects.\r\nBlood tests that reliably pick up signs of heart damage in men do not always work in women.\r\nWomen seem much more likely than men to develop a rare, temporary type of heart failure in response to severe emotional stress.\r\n\"We don't have good explanations for these gender differences,\" said Dr. Alice K. Jacobs, a cardiologist at Boston University.\r\nShe said that one reason women have not fared as well as men after bypass surgery and balloon procedures may be that women are smaller, and so are their blood vessels, and the vessels may tend to clog up again more easily after the procedures.\r\nIn addition, surgeons performing bypasses in women have been less likely to use an artery from inside the chest wall, because it is smaller and harder to work with — even though using the chest artery instead of a leg vein gives most patients better odds of long-term survival.\r\nIn the past, Dr. Jacobs said, cardiologists had only big balloons and bulky tubing to open blocked vessels, and some of the equipment may have been too large for women.\r\n\"Now we have tiny wires, balloons and stents, and it's less of an issue,\" she said, adding that success rates in women were improving.\r\nWomen like Ms. Kachmann-Geltz have become an important focus of study. Her doctors believe she has an insidious type of heart disease, more common in women than men, that researchers are just beginning to understand.\r\nThese patients have chest pain and abnormal stress tests. Their heart muscle is starved and aching for oxygen — and yet their coronary arteries look wide open on an angiogram, the test in which doctors inject the vessels with dye and then X-ray them to spot blockages.\r\nSome of these women also score poorly on a simple survey — the Duke Activity Status Index — that gauges their strength and ability to exercise by asking questions like whether they can walk up a flight of stairs or run a short distance. A low score is a reliable predictor of more heart problems to come.\r\nFor those with symptoms, the real, underlying problem may be a disorder called microvascular disease, a narrowing or stiffening of the smaller arteries that nourish the heart, vessels too tiny to show up on an angiogram.\r\n\"These little arterioles are deciding where relatively low and higher blood flow should occur,\" said Dr. Bairey Merz, explaining that the smaller vessels are more muscular than large ones, and their walls contract or relax to regulate blood flow.\r\nIn microvascular disease, the small vessels lose their ability to dilate and increase blood flow to the heart. The cause does not seem to be fatty deposits like the ones that can block the coronary arteries.\r\nRather, the muscles in the arterioles thicken, a process called remodeling, and the walls may stiffen and begin to close in. The result is ischemia, lack of blood flow. Over time, it increases the risk of heart failure and heart attacks.\r\nThree million women in the United States may have microvascular heart disease, said Dr. Bairey Merz, chairwoman of a government-sponsored study of the disorder, called Wise, for Women's Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation.\r\nThat study, begun in 1996, included 936 women who had angiograms because of symptoms like chest pain. Their average age was 58, but a quarter were younger and premenopausal.\r\nThe angiograms found that only a third had blockages in their coronary arteries. In men with similar symptoms, three-quarters or more would have had severe blockages, said Dr. Carl J. Pepine, an investigator in the study and the chief of cardiovascular medicine at the University of Florida.\r\nAnother third of the women had no blockages but did have low blood flow to the heart, most likely a result of microvascular disease. The deficiency was found by a test in which doctors first measured blood flow through the heart and then injected a drug that should have made the arteries dilate and increased the flow. If the flow did not rise, the patient most likely had microvascular disease.\r\nAmong those judged to have the disorder, the rate of deaths or heart attacks was 10 percent after four years — much higher than would be expected for women with normal angiograms.\r\nThe findings call for a major shift in the treatment of women with chest pain or other symptoms and normal angiograms, said Dr. George Sopko of the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. \"Instead of tossing aside the angiogram and saying you're O.K., let's make sure we are not missing anything.\"\r\nDoctors should use the Duke survey and consider other tests that can pick up signs of ischemia. And since recent studies have also suggested that women who score high on measures of hostility have an increased risk of heart problems, Dr. Sopko said: \"If a woman comes in and has symptoms, let's be careful when we evaluate her. Let's listen to her, look at all the risk factors and include the psychosocial evaluation.\"\r\nHigh cholesterol and high blood pressure are almost certainly among the causes of microvascular disease, and it is essential to treat them aggressively in women with chest pain, Dr. Pepine said, and to urge women to exercise, avoid smoking and lose weight if they are too heavy.\r\nRecent studies have found that high blood pressure — particularly high readings in the top number, the systolic pressure — is a more serious risk factor in women before menopause than after, and researchers say it should be monitored and treated.\r\n\"You don't want to be disabled and lead a miserable life,\" Dr. Pepine said. \"Women who develop heart failure tolerate it much more poorly than men, and they tolerate heart attacks and bypass surgery more poorly than men. We don't want them to get to that stage.\"\r\nThe meaning of other findings is less clear, Dr. Sopko said, adding that researchers were debating what if anything to do for women who had high levels of a substance called C-reactive protein, a marker for inflammation, which is thought to play a role in heart disease.\r\n\"We know it appears to be a marker for atherosclerosis,\" Dr. Sopko said, \"but that is far from saying we have to act on that marker with such and such strategies. Simple, fairly appealing strategies may not work out that well. We have to go back and get better knowledge.\"\r\nWhy microvascular disease might be more common in women than men is unknown. Inflammation and anemia, both more common in women, have been suggested as possible factors, along with hormonal fluctuations, but none have been proved.\r\nSome researchers think microvascular disease may help explain some of the other gender differences — why, for instance, women tend to have worse symptoms than would be expected based on the condition of their coronary arteries.\r\nBut microvascular disease is not easy to detect. When doctors see clean coronary arteries on an angiogram, they may not take a patient's chest pain seriously or recommend more tests or treatment.\r\n\"I was treated like a crazy woman,\" Ms. Kachmann-Geltz said, noting that one doctor offered her tranquilizers, implying that her problems were all in her head.\r\nHer symptoms began during her third pregnancy, and her heart function deteriorated so much that she nearly died during labor, she said, recalling that a nurse in the delivery room actually asked whether she was an organ donor.\r\nAfter her son was born, she suffered from angina for almost two years and had attacks that woke her up at night, before she found her way to Dr. Pepine.\r\nTests showed a blood flow deficit in her heart.\r\n\"It was 30 seconds that changed my life,\" she said. \"It was the first time I felt acknowledged. This is real, it's not in my head, it's not some pregnancy thing. I shake when I think about it.\"\r\nIt is impossible to say why the disease developed, but she noted that her mother also has heart disease. In any case, Ms. Kachmann-Geltz she began treatment with a diuretic and other medicines to control her blood pressure and cholesterol.\r\n\"My world started coming back to me,\" she said. \"It took about four months. I started to regain energy, and stopped having nighttime sweats and chest pain. I was able to start living my life again.\""}
